---
layout: post
title:  "Arrogant Rationalism"
date:   2019-12-13 00:00:00 +0400
---

Scientists possess more scientific knowledge than the average human. It is implied by the job title itself---scientists, those who “do science”. But science is the thing that contains all known logical knowledge about the universe. Hence, scientists often think that they know more about how the world works, which is kinda true. They also tend to be more logically consistent by the very facts that they are doing science and that science must be logically consistent because without logical consistency, one might as well claim anything one wants.

It is usually the case that science, which is largely based on rational thinking and the scientific method, is a superior school of thought compared to traditional ones in almost all disciplines. There is something so useful about science that makes people from everywhere adopt it to solve their problems. It's probably related to its ability to predict and explain an outcome of a phenomenon based on a logically consistent model of that phenomenon. More often than not, this ability makes scientists believe that they have some sort of a bestowed authority on topics that require logical reasoning. They believe that they can always make better choices when it comes to decision making and solving societal problems that can be modeled scientifically. In a way, they're right. However, experience and guts can triumph over meticulous logical reasoning sometimes, so scientists do fail---naively so in some cases. But seriously why do scientists with their superior rational thinking and the acclaimed scientific method ever fail? Well, I believe scientists fail because either: 1) their logically consistent model is wrong or (this is usually the case) doesn't apply to the real world very well (this also invalidates some of their explanations), or 2) the reasoning process leading to their model outcome is wrong or doesn't apply to the real world very well (inference, prediction, and dynamics, among other things, can all be covered by the model itself anyway, so it's up to your definition of the model).

I call this mode of thinking, where scientists or rational people are prone to naive failure, *arrogant rationalism*. Since this mode of thinking is adopted by a wider subset of people that encompass *some* scientists, I will refrain from simply using the term "*some* scientists" to describe these people. Instead, I will use the term "arrogant rational people" as it is more self-descriptive. These people are implicitly arrogant in their assertions and think that the opinions of the non-scientifically-oriented community is, well, bullshit-ish and based on lies, norms, biases, and/or emotions. These people use science to over-analyze every phenomenon, thinking that their scientifically-sound assumptions are often valid and make sense in the real world. They comment on every topic, thinking that the scientific method and logical consistency of *their* world model can solve everything. Unfortunately, life is never that simple. The model that works today might not work tomorrow (e.g. stock markets), and some systems are just too damn complex to explain using a few variables (especially and particularly systems involving humans, which include stock markets too). In addition to that, it is a proven fact that some problems cannot be solved exactly and efficiently at the same time (approximate solutions will almost always be more efficient than exact ones). In addition to all of that, most humans eventually make (a lot of) subtle mistakes in their logical reasoning. Sometimes, decisions based on simple hands-on experience can beat the shit out of the classical scientific method. There is nothing wrong with science, it’s just that, sometimes, it is difficult to *do science* correctly and apply it to the real world. Think about the science of *love*, for example, and how useless it is. Maybe one day we will find a rigorous scientific theory of love that let us make reliable predictions and marry people to each other efficiently so everyone can be happy, but right now, no. I don't think any scientific model of love would cut it in the real world. This is exactly one of these topics where experience would pat science on the shoulder and say: "Step back, buddy". In general, rational thinkers face this hurdle when they try analyze complex social phenomena based on logic alone because these phenomena inherently include emotions, which might come up as unexplainable structured randomness that siginificatly impact the model's outcome (again, stock markets).

So when should arrogant rational people stop being overly confident about their theories and experiments? In my opinion, it is healthy to criticize oneself every now and then and assume that one is wrong. Sometimes, the people who are not making any sense to you right now might actually be making a lot of sense when you look at it from a different perspective. Just start with their mindset and come to their conclusions from there, and maybe you will find something along the way. And if you didn’t, well... just move on! There will always be wrong people out there, and you don’t always have to convince everybody on the planet that your world model is more sound and logically consistent than theirs. Remember, your world model might be only true in your mindset alone and not necessarily in others'. Don’t be an *arrogantly* rational, be a *wisely* rational.