---
layout: post
title:  "Conciseness"
date:   2019-10-22 02:17:53 +0400
---


To be concise is to say (almost) the same thing with less words. There are so many reasons why it’s so great. People don’t want to hear you talking all day, for starters. Also, conciseness has some beauty to it. We can relate more to a meaning that is conveyed through shorter sentences than longer ones.

But why does conciseness have this quality of being *inherently good*? I thought about this for a while, and I concluded that the reason for this is the following: since conciseness means *approximately* the same meaning in less words, then being concise means achieving *approximately* similar results with less energy overall, either from the speaker or the listener (i.e. energy for attention, processing, filtering, etc). The amount of energy people are willing to spend is situational though. For example, we like to spend more energy with people we love, so if you've noticed, we are usually less concise (i.e. more verbose) with our most beloved ones.

The key word in the last paragraph is *approximately*. Of course, we can’t achieve the exact same meaning with less words. If we are only talking about information using **bits** (0 and 1), then we can be perfectly concise at transmitting the bits, which means that we can eventually achieve the theoretical minimum amount of bits possible to represent a piece of information. This is because we have a precise mechanism for information retrieval (i.e. deterministic decompression algorithms). In this case, conciseness is called (non-lossy) **compression**, so you can consider conciseness as a generalization of compression in the sense that it values more optimal descriptions (explanations, interpretations, etc.) of a piece of information given a target language in which the compressed information shall be presented in (e.g. bits or language) and other constraints (which could also be encoded as regularizers in the objective that we are looking to optimize, which is energy in our case). The general aspects of compression also transfer nicely to conciseness. For example, you can use Occam’s Razor to achieve better results in constructing a predictive model and also in arguing with other people.

Compression of **words**, as in compressing their *meanings* somehow, is an ill-defined process for the very reason that the choice of a word itself---irrespective of its given meaning in the dictionary---directly impacts the meaning it wants to convey based on each of our own unique associative experiences. Otherwise, summaries would be just called *compression schemes*. People summarize differently because achieving conciseness is often an ambiguous, subjective goal. Conciseness is subjective because the more empirical evidence you have of what a good concise writing constitutes of, the more acclaimed and well-regarded (i.e. better) your summaries will be. Of course, ambiguities are undesirable, but you know what they say: ***confidence is sexy***.

How can we be confident that our conciseness is good? If you look at special cases of conciseness, such as text summarization, you can see that you can easily be confident by **following the leaders** of text summarization (aka learning from the experts of summarization). Just follow their rules-of-thumb, let them evaluate your summaries, get their feedbacks, enhance and improve, and be a little creative. In fact, following the experts is a well-known learning algorithm that has nice mathematical guarantees, so it is a logically-justified strategy that we seem to be following naturally without being taught about it.

Notice that we came back to the original point of understanding the nature of conciseness. Why do the experts themselves summarize this way? Why are they concise that way? Well, I guess it has to do with some innate reactions from our brains. Summaries require less energy and time from the reader to digest the text and get the main points, and brains like less energy and main points. The brain is generally optimizing an innate objective, from which a more specific, contexual objective is construced and optimized depending on the context (getting the main points from a text in less time and less thinking, for example). Yeah... I guess that’s it. Similar to many physical phenomena, it happens this way and that way because such and such quantity is always being optimized.
