---
layout: post
title:  "The arrogant scientist syndrome"
date:   2019-12-13 00:00:00 +0400
---

Scientists possess more scientific knowledge than the average human. It is implied by the job title itself—“scientists”, those who “do science”. But science is the thing that contains all known logical knowledge about the universe. Hence, scientists often think that they know more about how the world works, and they tend to be more logically consistent by the very facts that they are doing science and that science must be logical consistent (otherwise I can claim anything).

This makes scientists believe that they have some sort of a bestowed authority on topics that require logical reasoning. They believe that they can make superior choices when it comes to decision making and solving societal problems. In a way, they are right. However, experience does triumph meticulous logic sometimes, and thus, scientists do fail sometimes—naively so.

This is what I call the “arrogant scientist syndrome”. Some scientists are arrogant and think that the opinions of the non-scientifically-oriented community is bullshit and based on lies and emotions. They use science to over-analyze every phenomenon, thinking that their scientifically-sound assumptions are often valid and make sense in the real world. They comment on every topic, thinking that the scientific method and logical consistency of *their* world model can solve everything. Unfortunately, life is never that simple. The model that works today might not work tomorrow, and some systems are just too damn complex to explain using a few variables, and it is a proven fact that some problems cannot be solved efficiently. In addition to all of that, humans make a lot of mistakes, too. Sometimes, decisions based on simple hands-on experience can beat the shit out of the classical scientific method. There is nothing wrong with science, it’s just that, sometimes, it is difficult to *do science* correctly and apply it to the real world (think about the science of *love*, for example, and how useless it is).

So when should scientists stop being overly confident about their theories and experiments? In my opinion, it is healthy to criticize oneself every now and then and assume that one is wrong. Sometimes, these people who are not making sense to you might actually be making a lot of sense when you look at it from a different perspective or mindset. Just start with their mindset and come to their conclusions from there, and maybe you will find something. And if you didn’t, well... just move on! You don’t have to convince everybody on the planet that your world model is more sound and logically consistent because that is only true in your mindset and not necessarily in others. Don’t be an arrogant scientist, be a wise scientist.