---
layout: post
title:  "You don’t understand I-don’t-understand"
date:   2019-12-18 00:00:00 +0400
---

This is a pedagogical analysis of not-understanding.

Teachers often ask students things like this: “Did you understand?”, “Do you have any questions?”, or “Who can answer this question?”, and so on. The problem with these kind of questions is that the teacher is giving the student control over the lecture, and quite often the students are very bad at making the lecture interesting or useful (unless the audience is a small number of extremely interested and cooperative students, like in some graduate courses).

Depending on the students, the assumed goal of every lecture is well-known; to communicate ideas. However, sometimes, the students’ goal is to finish the lecture as soon as possible, disregarding how much they actually understood (i.e. how much of the ideas were communicated successfully). This is typically due to a lot of reasons, many of which are attributed to “unorganized attention” (having priorities that make one pay more attention to less important subjects, and the opposite). For example, if the student was playing a video game and have been fighting a tough boss for a long time and not winning, the student might sit during the lecture and brainstorm new strategies to beat this tough boss in addition to (unsuccessfully) trying to understand the material of the lecture. This is the first point to keep in mind: students may be present, but their minds may be stuck somewhere else. Bring them here, tell them the whole story again, and then ask: “Did you understand?”

Now the second point is about the “understanding” part. When a student says “Yes, I understand”, they probably don’t understand in your sense, they understand in their probably-naive sense. They might have understood the subject to the extent that enables them to barely pass the next exam, which is a really bad measure of understanding. A key measure of understanding some concept is the ability to explain it (the Feynman way). This is a really good measure to test not only the students’s understanding, but your own understanding as well. Of course, since you’re the teacher, you‘d better understand the topic since you’re explaining it. Now instead of asking “Do you understand?”, ask “Can you explain it?”

The final point is related to the second in that you try to get into the students’ brains and teach them from there. Don’t let them decide whether things are going well based on their ways. Whenever you ask a question, ask it not in the sense that you are proof-checking their answers, ask it in the sense that you want them to cough up their answers voluntarily. For example, the students might not have follow-up questions, but you can stir up their internal reasoning until an apparent paradox or a missing piece of the puzzle prompt the students to ask interesting questions, and thus remember the concept from the memory of this internal conflict. Questions are a good way to test student’s understanding as well, especially open-ended ones. This is what researchers do; ask themselves interesting questions and then try to find answers. Try to teach students this skill. Let them ask interesting questions and find the answers themselves, even if you had to baby-feed them or leave breadcrumbs on the way. Do it from their perspective, not yours.

Once you prepare the students to be able to understand, communicate, and expand on an idea, they will have the ability to use that idea and spread it in a very efficient manner, and thus accelerate the progress of science and spread of knowledge.