---
layout: post
title:  "I Hate Politics"
date:   2019-06-25 03:00:00 +0400
---

Do you hate politics? Ever wondered why every place seems to have its own politics?  Companies have politics, universities have politics, families have politics, countries have politics (bet you didn’t know that), and I'm afraid even the animal kingdom has recently gotten into politics as well (I once saw a documentry about lizards fighting for supremacy). I think politics is everywhere because of two simple concepts that are involved in every political system: hierarchy and competition.

When you have a hierarchical system in a society, you have social classes, where the higher social classes have fewer members. As a consequence, the higher social classes have access to better social privileges, perhaps for the very reason that they have fewer members (privileges like social influence and power). Of course, the lower social classes would love to have those privileges, so they compete with each other to grab one of those few seats in the higher social classes. This competition is dirty, and it is what we call politics (lol). You should be wondering by now: "What about poor people?" Usually, the lower social classes, too, have less members than the middle class, which renders my previous argument moot. However, I think this is the case because we have governments, which is a more complex political system. Governments change the equation by providing (some) support to lower social classes, e.g. by socialism or minimum-wage policies. I'm going to assume that the government doesn't give a shit about its people. In other words, the government is just a bad aristocracy, which is something that has been quite prevalent throughout history, to be honest.

Back to our topic. Let me explain how competitions come into play with hierarchies. Competitions in a social setting always involve a hierarchy of some kind. Generally speaking, competitions occur between some entities for a prize. If you were to repeat the same competition many times among those entities, you will naturally end up with a ranking if you sort the entities by the win-lose ratio (if we’re talking about a simple competition between 2 entities). You can easily create a hierarchy among the entities by scaling the ratios logarithmically (for example, `-log(1-ratio)`) or hyperbolically if you want poor people. This way, you will end up with a number for each entity that represents its social class in some sense (think of the millionaires club vs. the billionaires club). Of course, assuming that politics is made out of the same competition over and over again is naive. The competitions become more and more exclusive the higher you climb the hierarchy. Only the elites have access to these high-prize competitions. But from where do these competitions arise? Usually from human desires (money and power blah blah blah). The prize is set by the wants of the entities. For example, economy is composed of many competitions (games) between two entities—the buyer and the seller. The prize is an asset (money, merchandise, etc.). You get the point.

In fact, studying competitions and games in depth is a complex topic that has been formulated mathematically under the name of Game Theory, which was developed by John Nash (portrayed in the Oscar-winning movie *A Beautiful Mind*). You might think that game theory was just made for fun because John Nash was bored and wanted to play theoretical games or something. You’re very wrong. Games—or as we put it here, competitions—are so fundamental, omnipresent, and profound, they offer great explanations for the core mechanism of many phenomena, most notably the economy (which is why John Nash got a Nobel prize in economy). I believe that Game Theory has the potential to explain many elementary concepts in nature and the mind as well. Whenever you have two or more entities that have access to a set of actions (e.g. buy, sell, run, etc.) that change the value of some global objective (utility in terms of money, power, sex, etc.), you have a game. Even chess is a game (*the more you know*). I highly suggest you look up game theory if you’re interested because some of the things I said might be completely wrong, as I’m not an expert in this field, but it is probably approximately correct... I guess.

After all, nobody loves politics, even though it’s made out of games, which is weird because people love games. Probably the reason behind that is that these games are highly rigged and inconsistent, since the judges who evaluate your performance in them are humans (often bad and a little corrupt). I, myself, kind of hate the freaking guts out of politics, but somehow enjoy thinking about it, especially from a philosophical point of view. I think that doing politics *very* well is extremely difficult. Think about the following vague, but profound, question: *How do you rule a country?* It doesn’t get anymore ambiguous than that. What are you supposed to optimize? Power? Money? Respect? Knowledge? Happiness? Whose happiness? How do you even measure happiness? What if the majority were happy, but some minorities were extremely unhappy? What if everybody was just slightly unhappy, but satisfied overall? Oh, the ambiguities! Becoming a good leader is very challenging, so I really respect great leaders who do their jobs very well and show great leadership overall. This is why I love my country, the United Arab Emirates, and its great leaders, which is also another reason why I love thinking about leadership and politics (occasionally).
