---
layout: post
title:  "The Value of Life"
date:   2019-08-02 23:55:27 +0400
---

Life is invaluable. People hold dearly to their lives. Killers take away lives, so one could say that by killing someone, they are stealing something invaluable, or priceless, from them. What is the right justice to serve in this case? To be just and completely fair, we have to take something invaluable from them in return.

Some think that this invaluable thing should be their lives as well, so they take it away from them (execute them). Others think that their lives could be taken away temporarily by putting the killers in a small isolated word (jail). How do you choose correctly what to take from killers in return for what they took from their victims (which is their invaluable lives)?

The problem is that life cannot be returned to the victim, nor any other thing of the same value can be returned to the victim’s family (unless one believes in the afterlife). However, saying that life is **literally invaluable** would allow the victims to claim that they can be compensated with whatever they ask for. Saying that life is invaluable is the same as saying that the value of life is infinite, so the value of what we can ask for in return is not well-defined, as it could be infinite as well. If you know a little bit of math, you’ll know that infinity is not a number, so you can’t just compare two infinities meaningfully. Thus, in order to understand how to be completely just in determining the compensation for the loss of life, we have to sit down and admit that life does have a value; a finite value.

The value of life is a subjective thing. The value of one’s own life may be, indeed, relatively infinite as it could be more important to oneself than anything else. But that isn’t always the case. If it was, then nobody would sacrifice their lives defending their countries or families, for example. The value of other people’s lives is also subjective in a similar fashion. In addition, life is does not have the same value at every moment. Young people may value their lives much more than very old people. Furthermore, some moments in life are extremely filled with joy and action, and others are just dull and worthless. Finally, everybody is going to die sooner or later, so unless your life has moments which have an infinite value, your life must have a finite value since its duration is finite (unless you’re immortal, of course).

Now consider this: suppose that criminal A (old, male) raped and killed a young woman who has a high potential to do great things for society and is living her life to the fullest. Next, suppose that criminal B (young, female) killed an extremely old fucker who is a worthless neglected piece of junk that did absolutely nothing for society, or, even worse, did really bad things to society. Then, should we REALLY treat criminals A and B equally? Should we serve them the same justice (e.g. same number of years in prison)?

Think about this scenario (and tell me what you think). I bet you’re thinking “Criminal A should be tortured and have his dick stuck up his own ass for eternity” and maybe “Criminal B should be served justice for what she did no matter what, but… I feel like we should investigate this further. Maybe the killer had some very strong motives?” If you look at it more closely, justice is all about a good balance between fairness (giving back to the victim what they lost) and prevention of more future wrong-doings (by inferring the true intentions and motives of the criminals, and punishing them based on this evidence and analysis, for example). This can be more generalized by thinking about justice as athe idea of achieving an equilibrium of people's utilities (or values of things people own). So, fairness can be thought of as achieving the equilibrium given past utilities, evidence, and valuations of things in question, whereas crime prevention can be though of as achieving an equilibirium given the likelihood of utilities in the future.

Therefore, if we see justice from this lens, we can infer that the fair valuation of life should achieve the most stable results. In other words, we should be aiming for some equilibirum of utilities of the people on the criminal side vs. the people on the victim side. This is all good, until you try to measure the utility of a person, which is… practically impossible. We can have a standardized notion of utility (income, value of assets, health benefits, family), but this has to be unfair to some people on which this standardized notion of utility is inaccurate. There has to be a decision made solely by heuristics and intuition (i.e. prior beliefs from experience). This is why the valuation of life is extremely difficult.