---
layout: post
title:  "Barely Legal"
date:   2020-11-09 02:15:15 +0400
---

For all $$\epsilon > 0$$, the following situation is thought to be morally justified from the western view of dating and consent:

$$18+\epsilon$$ year-old guy: "Hi I’m very attracted to you can we date?"

$$18-\epsilon$$ year-old girl: "Eww creep get away from me you pedo!"

For infinitely small $$\epsilon$$, you can see the absurdity of this rejection, as the age difference would be $$2 \epsilon$$, and as you might already know, for any $$\epsilon > 0$$, you can find $$\delta$$ such that $$2 \epsilon < \delta$$. Therefore, creeping out from an arbitrary threshold set heuristically by the law is itself absurd, as the law’s primary intent is to encourage moral behavior, order, reasonability, and justice.

This strict thresholding is never the perfect idea for implementing any law without eventually facing extreme cases of moral ambiguities where enforcing the law in these particular cases would not necessarily bring justice (e.g. an $$\epsilon$$-underage person doing something illegal for underage people, legal otherwise). For example, compare the legality and the morality of these two situations: $$18 - \epsilon$$ year-old girl with a $$20$$ year-old guy vs. $$18 + \epsilon$$ year-old girl with a $$50$$ year-old guy.

One might be tempted to think that imposing a soft threshold is a natural solution to this problem, like setting a probability distribution as the threshold where the mean would be $$18$$, for example. But what distribution to use and how to parameterize it? And how will these rules be imposed by the law on the public and by the public on themselves? Randomly sampling a threshold for each case would still result in equally morally-unsatisfying situations as is the case when using the hard threshold. I mean, when should you call the police? Will you really ask the government to sample a rule from their soft threshold sampler? Will they give each citizen a sampler device to use for each morally-ambiguous situation (which is a brilliant, yet a very stupid idea)?

Clearly, the problem here is the outliers, and not each individual cases. If a $$44$$ year-old guy dated a $$14$$ year-old girl, then we can all agree that it’s kinda fucked up in a certain way. I mean she’s still pretty young and doesn’t know shit about life, so it’s difficult to argue that her consent really counts (and in many countries, even her guardians’ consent don't count). So in the obvious cases, the soft threshold should not be used at all. In general, a morally-ambiguous situation is where we have to start thinking about applying this soft threshold.

In a morally-ambiguous situation (i.e. an extreme or outlier case), the court can sample a law using a soft threshold, which is naive as we said that it doesn’t improve much on the current system. A better alternative than sampling is weighting. The court can measure the degree to which the law applies in the outlier case by measuring its “distance” (i.e. difference) from a base reference case that is set by the court to which the majority of the public (and the whole court) agrees on the fact that it breaks a particular law unequivocally. The universal measure of difference proposed for a law should also be agreed on similarly. A base reference case is easy to come up for many situations, but designing it such that it breaks the minimum set of laws broken by breaking a particular law, and such that it applies to real life, is easier said than done.

For the “44 year-old guy vs. $$14$$ year-old girl” case, you should assume that, other than the fact that their ages are incompatible and extremely different, they are both completely law-abiding and to the maximum extent. You will quickly realize that our prejudice compels us to prosecute the $$44$$ year-old guy to the fullest extent using the most draconian laws available in our hands. However, had the $$14$$ year-old girl become a $$18 + \epsilon$$ year-old girl instead, we would show slight contempt for the “greedy” girl, slightly distracting our attention from the fact that the $$44$$ year-old guy is still a creep and older in the same order of magnitude than the girl (though less of a creep than being with a $$14$$ year-old girl, obviously). All of these should not be affected by the base reference case showcasing a situation breaking this particular law. The difference between both situations in the current system of law is maximal. Say the measure is equal to 1 if the cases are maximally different, and 0 if they are minimally different (or exactly the same and not different, in human language). These two cases would be treated very differently by the law since one is “legal”, and the other is “illegal”, even though the difference between these two cases is small by any reasonable measure of difference (both guys are classified as pedos, to start with). However, in the current system of law, the difference between these two cases is 1 because the law measures the difference between cases by their legality. In the hard threshold paradigm, we would also classify the  “$$44$$ year-old guy vs. $$18 + \epsilon$$ year-old girl” situation as “ewww”-legal or “technically legal but I wish it was slightly illegal”-legal. However, in the soft threshold paradigm, you can simply say that this case is “slightly illegal”, whatever that means. But based on the many similarities between this case and the base reference "law-breaking" case, we can say “hey wait a sec, I feel that there is some moral-ambiguity about this case. The guy is not completely innocent. This case is very close to being illegal, and we should do something about it”. Well, when you can’t enforce the law and prosecute the offender, you can at least impose some regulations and fees that would deter the offender from being in this “slightly illegal” situation, so you’re basically saying to him “Ok legal, but not really, so we’ll annoy you with all these regulations” making the $$44$$ year-old guy rethink the attractiveness of his situation (and hopefully its morality) and move on to a more legal, stable situation like a normal human being. It’s kinda like a market (I know humans are not merchandise blah blah blah). The nice thing about fees and regulations is that you can reflect the degree of “offense” in them (i.e. to what extent the law was broken), for example by increasing the fees exponentially with increasing similarity to a reference case. Regulations can actually help guide people toward the more legal situations. Now we can see that the absurdity and the moral-ambiguity of the central case of this essay (the pedo + almost-underage combo case) can be mitigated through some regulations based on extreme age differences.

So far, the biggest hurdle we face in implementing this mechanism is to find or hypothesize a reference case for each law that can be potentially broken. This is different from what we have, where breaking the law can be simply proven by deduction. This is going to take a lot of effort to establish. Also, instead of having one reference case, we could potentially have multiple references due to the complexity of the case. It gets complicated very, very quickly. But notice that we said that soft thresholding is only necessary in morally-ambiguous situations. Thus, in order to efficiently benefit from this system, it would be better to utilize it on demand by the court and set up new references from past solved cases. The number of morally-ambiguous cases might be infinite, so it makes sense to study the cases that show up in court only. This way, the court can decide whether the $$44$$ year-old sugar daddy is a pedo or not, and after that use this case as a reference case of the law in question.

