---
layout: post
title:  "Haskell Schmaskell -- Part 1: Dates"
date:   2019-06-26 16:00:00 +0400
---

I love Haskell because it is elegant and concise. Some types of problems are very suitable to solve in Haskell because of its purely functional form, which provides guarantees about the type of output to be expected out of every function. This post is for people who know a little bit about functional programming. If you want to learn Haskell, I highly suggest the well-written guide [Learn you a Haskell for Great Good](http://learnyouahaskell.com). Don't be fooled by the childish drawings.

What type of problems can Haskell solve? Many, actually. First of all, I'm not a professional Haskell developer, so I will not show you production-level code or real-world business problems solved by Haskell. (Actually, Jane Street is a famous quantitative trading firm that primarily uses a functional programming language, called OCaml, to solve its problems. Haskell is also used in web dev, but I don't know how.) In this post, I will show you how to solve three semi-useless problems: dates, roman numerals, and poker. Clearly, having a framework for dates is important, but there are many powerful ones already in existence–if not inside your system already. I would argue that the poker framework is the most useful, because I believe the solution is more concise and readable in Haskell than in other procedural programming languages. Also, creating a poker calculator in Haskell was fun.

## Dates
dates dates dates...
